members of the Jewish faith are
observing Passover a celebration of
Freedom From Slavery but it's a somber
occasion for Jews in Israel this year
because of the war with Hamas in Gaza in
our next report the Israeli hostages
still held by Hamas how their relatives
are
coping bring them home that's the
message these Israelis are sending to
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
they've set up a Passover table outside
netanyahu's house but all the chairs are
empty symbolizing the missing
hostages they're sick of waiting and
some accuse Netanyahu of deliberately
stalling hostage
negotiations we believe that the
government and BB Nan don't want them
here he don't want the hostage back he
want to keep the war he's afraid that
the war will end because he's afraid
that he's going home and he's going to
prison so he just want to keep the war
after dark the protesters burned a table
not a ritual but a gesture of defiance
and
Desperation in Tel Aviv families and
friends of hostages taken from a kabut
near Gaza Gather in a plaza the city
council officially renamed hostages
Square mixed emotions running High
so my feelings are very complicated
because this is the holiday of the
liberty and for us it's not it's not
Liberty because my father is in Gaza he
in captivity my mother was also
kidnapped and she returned after 54 days
so we are very confused with the
situation and it's
very we feel very broken because my
father is not here and all the the other
just are there with no Freedom what
we're focused in is reminding the other
people around us that she is still alive
that we can still bring her back and
this is this is a holiday that
celebrates Freedom so we don't
commemorate people here we try to remind
other people that freedom is still
possible and that people should be free
meanwhile across the border in Gaza the
war rages on
bombardments troops and tanks with no
deal for the hostages return in
sight well my next guest is a living
witness to one of the most important
moments in Israeli history Yuri droy was
press spokesman for the governments of
two Israeli Prime Ministers Yak Rabin
and shimone Paris in the 1990s as the
Oslo Accords were negotiated and signed
he's also a former Israeli Air Force
officer and he is the founder of the
Jerusalem press club I'm happy to
welcome Yuri dry to the program tonight
Mr dry it's good to have you with us I
want to start out by just asking you
about the situation with the Israeli
hostages being held by Hamas some of the
relatives of those hostages say that
their release is being postponed if you
will um in order to keep prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu in
power help our viewers understand this
accusation do you is that possible do
you think that is what is happening
here well uh if we were talking about
Benjamin Nan only I would
unfortunately have to agree to this
accusation but um in the emergency
Coalition that he formed you also have
people
like Benny gun and G Eisen these are
serious people people and as as long as
they are part of uh the current
Coalition I don't think uh the
government is uh
doing uh these kind of things to just to
to be in power but as I said in the
beginning if it were for netan only I
wouldn't be surprised well you know we
often hear that Netanyahu is very
unpopular among Israelis particularly
among Israeli voters so is is it true
when I say as long as Israel is at war
with Hamas Netanyahu will remain in
power well that's uh that's the
Assumption right now there's more and
more Israelis who are
um you know reluctant to protest when
war is going on uh people are
have a mixed feelings about this I
personally must admit I myself found it
difficult to protest against the
government while we are uh Waging War in
Gaza but now I think the more and more
Israelis
are starting to understand that at this
government uh of Netanyahu is the
government that brought us to this
situation by
uh pretending to contain Hamas by
actually letting Hamas Prosper with the
Qatari money
Etc and then waging a war with the war
aims which are not realistic you know
netan keeps talking about total Victory
this is nonsense uh there's no such
thing we are six months in a war with
Hamas which is not a an army or whatever
it's it's an organization and and
they're still standing on their feet so
more and more Israelis are weary of uh
the netan government and there's a call
add to this of course the fact that
133 hostages are still in the hands of
Hamas and who knows how how many are
alive still all this leads many Israelis
to really protest against the government
and call for its uh top Ling I want to
ask you about there are reports today
that that Hamas has made an offer to
completely disband if and only if a
Palestinian state is created you know
you come from an era in Israeli history
when there was this strong belief in the
two State solution C do you think that
it's viable at all to consider this if
it's true what Hamas is offering that a
two-state solution could be created
moving forward if Hamas is allowed to
continue to
exist well uh you're talking to a sworn
optimist so uh yes I think the two state
is still the only uh
viable uh solution to the problem
because the these are two peoples
claiming the right to the same piece of
land so the only solution is dividing
the land uh between them and and as you
mentioned in the beginning I served
under Rabin and Paris and during the OS
times when there there was the beginning
of this uh and you know
paradoxically Hamas is now calling for a
two-state
solution uh which is I think most
Israelis should have embraced it and and
welcome it not to mention the Saudi or
the Arab initiative of 2002 yeah which
calls for the same thing except that the
current government the current
government in Israel is is not ready for
this so we'll have to wait Mr J do you
think that that Israel is running a
danger here of missing an opportunity so
let's say Hamas is being truthful that
um it will disband if there's a
two-state solution that becomes reality
then the burden is on Israel in the West
Bank to pull back these illegal
settlements do you can you imagine
Israel doing
that well not Israel under the current
government unfortunately I hate to say
that because uh in in the current
Coalition there are some Messianic and
and and and
AR
settlers uh who will make it difficult
with the with another government yes I
doubt it if the big settlements can go
because they are already accomplished
facts but some kind of a settlement that
definitely should be uh achieved
especially if other Arab countries are
joining and some of them already have
joined under the Abraham Accords so
there's a there's a potential here
there's a opportunity here but we need a
different Israeli government uh to uh
stand up to this kind of
occasion Yuri droy we appreciate you
taking the time to talk with us um
fascinating insights thank
you thank you so turning now to the war
in Gaza Israel says it's planning a
ground offensive against the city of
Rafa despite intense International
criticism the Israeli government claims
that most of hamas's remaining forces
are hiding out in Rafa in southern Gaza
where more than a million Palestinians
are Sheltering satellite images show
rows of tents that were not there
earlier this month unconfirmed reports
say Israel has bought 40,000 tents to
accommodate the those displaced in any
assault earlier I spoke to Sam Rose
director of planning at unra the UN Aid
Agency for Palestinians I asked him
whether a humanitarian disaster can be
averted thanks bees thanks for having me
on look I think any shape or form in
which a large scale operation military
operation takes in Rafa will have
absolutely devastating consequ
consquences for the almost 1.5 million
people who have been seeking Refuge here
for the past several months however it
is done we fear that the uh implications
will be absolutely catastrophic for a
population that has already gone through
so much yet despite what you say Israel
appears committed to carrying out this
operation should Israel have a rethink
is that what you're
saying I think we as a humanitarian
organization we we as part of the
humanitarian Community here we're
interested in the humanitarian
well-being of that population we call
for an immediate ceasefire for immediate
release of hostages and for an end to
this uh to this Bloodshed and this hell
that people have had to put up with we
uh yes we we call for it to stop we as
the humanitarian Community have very
little influence on that directly but we
call on those that do have influence to
do everything that they can before it's
too late you're with the largest Aid
operation that's working in Gaza have
you seen or been told of Israel's plans
to evacuate people from Rafa before any
offensive we personally as unra me
myself no have not been told we are not
party to those discussions we read the
newspapers we follow the satellite
imagery as you are we hear the
announcements from the Israeli
authorities we understand that it may be
IM but there is still time not to go
ahead with it but no we are not party to
any of the planning on their side
speaking of satellite satellite imagery
there are satellite images that have
appeared of tents that have come up in
southern Gaza do you know who put them
up and if they are for people who might
potentially be evacuated from
Rafa I do not know I've not seen the
tents personally I've seen the satellite
imagery we can only assume that these
are for people who will be evacuated I
can see them on your screen right now
but as I said it's hard to see
impossible to see how this can take
place how this can happen without major
humanitarian consequences major
suffering major loss of life we're
talking about human beings here who've
already gone through so much temporary
camps talk of setting of flooding Gaza
with Aid these are human beings they
simply cannot put up with this we see
the pictures as you've seen them now but
no person
I cannot I cannot verify them myself
there this war has continued for about 7
months now if I'm not wrong what would
you say about uh similar evacuation
plans that have been implemented from
time to time in various parts of Gaza
have they actually
worked they they haven't worked no uh I
mean what are the objectives that have
been achieved people have left without
anything they've left at short notice
they've received leaflets from the air
telling them to move within a matter of
hours we saw that in Gaza City back in
in in October we saw it in Rafa and we
saw it with this checkerboard approach
that was taken several months ago uh so
no these may give people time to move
but there is nowhere safe to go to we've
all seen the reports we've all met the
people whose relatives have been killed
we've not all but we have here people
who've been killed on their way from one
spot to another have they been directed
to by the authorities being being killed
on on on the way so no there is no safe
place to go and as people are hemmed
into an Ever smaller area it will become
even more difficult both in terms of the
conditions that they're facing and our
ability as a humanarian community to
deliver the aid and the supplies that
they need and for them to get the water
the sanitation the health care the food
and the shelter which will keep them
alive Sam just one final question you're
there in Rafa what are people in Rafa
telling you or telling unra about uh
what could be coming their
way people are waking up as they have
done now for several months with with
feelings of of dread with fear with
resignation for what what comes next I
mean it it's odd somehow this is my
third third visit and and over time you
know people people get used to the most
horrible of circumstances so life
somehow gets back not to to normal noral
but life progresses slightly people are
dreading the thoughts of of having to
move again they just want this madness
they just want this situation to come to
an end we'll uh leave it there for the
time being but thanks so much for
joining us today Sam Rose director of
planning at unra joining us from Rafa in
the Gaza Strip thanks so much Sam